---
title: "LECTURE 3: Basics of Inferential Statistics"
date: 2025-10-21T15:55:50+02:00
deadline:
categories: [Statistics]
draft: false
---
#### Summary:

This lecture introduces inferential statistics, the procedures used for drawing conclusions that extend beyond the specific scores collected in a study. It establishes the fundamental distinction between a population (the entire group of interest) and a sample (the particular group of people studied). Research involves studying a sample and using its sample statistics (like the mean, M, and standard deviation, SD) to make inferences about the unknown population parameters (like μ and σ) . A central tool for this is the normal curve, which is a specific, mathematically defined, bell-shaped, symmetrical, and unimodal frequency distribution. Its importance is highlighted by the Central Limit Theorem (CLT). The CLT states that as sample size increases, the distribution of sample means will approach a normal distribution, regardless of the original population's shape.

To understand a score's position within this distribution, the Z score is used. A Z score indicates the number of standard deviations a raw score is above or below the mean , and it is calculated using the formula Z=(X−M)/SD. A distribution of Z scores always has a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1.

The standard nature of the normal curve means there is a known percentage of scores between any two points. For example, approximately 34% of scores fall between the mean and 1 SD , and 95% of all data falls between Z scores of -1.96 and +1.96. This allows for the calculation of probability , or the expected relative frequency of an outcome. Using a normal curve table or Excel functions , it is possible to determine the percentage of scores above or below a specific value, such as the percentage of people with an IQ above 125.

#### Reading materials:

##### Mandatory:

* Aron, A., Coups, E. J., & Aron, E. N. (2013). *Statistics for psychology* (6th ed.). Pearson. ({{< a_blank title="DOWNLOAD PDF" url="https://ibuit-my.sharepoint.com/:b:/g/personal/kirjakovski_ibu_edu_mk/EY8YX1R78ChDqORSuUCMc-0Bbr8wv638kogwUcTQUzSATQ?e=gCJH5O" >}})

	* Some Key Ingredients for Inferential Statistics [Chapter 3]

##### Supplementary:

* Howitt, D., & Cramer, D. (2014). *Introduction to statistics in psychology: With SPSS* (6th Edition). Pearson. ({{< a_blank title="DOWNLOAD PDF" url="https://ibuit-my.sharepoint.com/:b:/g/personal/kirjakovski_ibu_edu_mk/EVK61aTc5F9Justfth_5xPYBdWjXT3R5JRjz8ha3Smc1aw?e=VKmqI3" >}})

	* Shapes of Distributions of Scores [Chapter 5]
	* Standard Deviation and Z-scores [Chapter 6]