---
title: "LECTURE 2: Cognitive Neuroscience"
date: 2025-10-08T11:15:00+02:00
deadline:
categories: [Cognitive Process]
draft: false
---
#### Summary:

The study of cognitive neuroscience begins with the brain's fundamental unit, the neuron. Early theories imagined a continuous "nerve net," but it was discovered that the nervous system is composed of individual cells. These neurons, with their distinct cell bodies, dendrites, and axons, transmit signals throughout the body. Communication between neurons occurs at the synapse, where an electrical impulse, or action potential, causes the release of chemical neurotransmitters that excite or inhibit the next neuron.

These individual neuronal communications form the basis of the entire nervous system, which is divided into the Central Nervous System (the brain and spinal cord) and the Peripheral Nervous System. The brain itself is a highly complex organ. Its outer layer, the cerebral cortex, is divided into four primary lobes—frontal, parietal, temporal, and occipital—each responsible for distinct functions like reasoning, spatial processing, memory, and vision, respectively. Beneath the cortex lie crucial subcortical structures, including the limbic system, which governs emotions and memory formation.

To understand how the brain processes information, researchers explore concepts of sensory coding. While some neurons, or "feature detectors," respond to specific stimuli, complex perception arises from distributed representation, where multiple brain areas are activated simultaneously. These interconnected areas form neural networks, which have both a structural wiring (connectome) and functional connectivity that can be observed even when the brain is at rest, as seen in the Default Mode Network. The relationship between brain structure and cognitive function is investigated through various techniques, including single-cell recordings, neuroimaging like fMRI and PET scans, and studying the effects of brain damage, such as language impairments known as aphasias.

#### Reading materials:

##### Mandatory:
	
* Goldstein, E. B. (2019). *Cognitive psychology: Connecting mind, research, and everyday experience* (5th ed.). Cengage Learning.  ({{< a_blank title="DOWNLOAD PDF" url="https://ibuit-my.sharepoint.com/:b:/g/personal/kirjakovski_ibu_edu_mk/EYG80CtYuvpMijLNa6OTey4BNzVZp0ViA7qmN0Bn2vc5lQ?e=gCJKR8" >}})
	
	* Cognitive Neuroscience [Chapter 2]

##### Supplementary:
	
* Sternberg, R. J., & Sternberg, K. (2017). *Cognitive psychology* (7th ed.). Cengage Learning. (Supplementary; {{< a_blank title="DOWNLOAD PDF" url="https://ibuit-my.sharepoint.com/:b:/g/personal/kirjakovski_ibu_edu_mk/ERiMyzJ-LotFqEk0Z-J7C8YBIwg23mStYdZ3aR-mc7FLPw?e=sFeRKs" >}})

	* Cognitive Neuroscience [Chapter 2]
