---
title: "LECTURE 4: Attention"
date: 2025-10-22T16:02:26+02:00
deadline:
categories: [Cognitive Process]
draft: false
---
#### Summary:

This lecture defines attention as the mind taking possession of one object or train of thought, implying a withdrawal from some things to deal effectively with others. This process manifests as selective attention (focusing), divided attention (multitasking), and attentional capture. Early models sought to explain when selection occurs. Broadbent's filter model proposed an early filter based on physical characteristics, blocking unattended information. However, this was challenged by the "cocktail party effect" (hearing one's name) and findings that meaning could be processed from an unattended ear. Treisman’s attenuation model modified this, suggesting the unattended message is weakened, not blocked, allowing salient information (like one's name) to pass. In contrast, late selection models proposed that all stimuli are processed for meaning before selection. The Load Theory of Attention addresses how we ignore distractions, positing that this depends on the task's perceptual load. Low-load (easy) tasks leave spare processing capacity that "spills over" to process distractors, making distraction more likely. High-load (hard) tasks consume all resources, leaving none to process distractors.

Attention is directed both overtly (with eye movements) and covertly. Overt scanning is guided by bottom-up stimulus salience (e.g., color, contrast) and top-down cognitive factors like scene schemas (knowledge of what belongs in a scene) and immediate task demands. The outcome of attention is improved response speed and enhanced physiological brain activity. The failure to attend leads to phenomena like inattentional blindness (failing to see visible objects) and change blindness (failing to notice changes in a scene). Finally, attention serves a critical "binding" function. Feature Integration Theory proposes that in a preattentive stage, an object's features (color, shape) are separate. Focused attention acts as the "glue" required to combine these features into a single, coherent object.

#### Reading materials:

* ##### Mandatory:
	* **Attention (Chapter 4)** from Goldstein, E. B. (2019). *Cognitive psychology: Connecting mind, research, and everyday experience* (5th ed.). Cengage Learning.  ({{< a_blank title="DOWNLOAD PDF" url="https://ibuit-my.sharepoint.com/:b:/g/personal/kirjakovski_ibu_edu_mk/EYG80CtYuvpMijLNa6OTey4BNzVZp0ViA7qmN0Bn2vc5lQ?e=gCJKR8" >}})
* ##### Supplementary:
	* **Attention and Consciousness (Chapter 4)** from Sternberg, R. J., & Sternberg, K. (2017). *Cognitive psychology* (7th ed.). Cengage Learning. (Supplementary; {{< a_blank title="DOWNLOAD PDF" url="https://ibuit-my.sharepoint.com/:b:/g/personal/kirjakovski_ibu_edu_mk/ERiMyzJ-LotFqEk0Z-J7C8YBIwg23mStYdZ3aR-mc7FLPw?e=sFeRKs" >}})
